---
title: About the Project
type: pages
---

## Izhva Komi Documentation Project

This is the website of a language documentation project funded by the Kone Foundation (Finland) which documents the Izhva dialect of the Komi language. This site contains material about our work and how it progresses. As the project lasts three years, it is among the largest documentation projects done with the Uralic languages. We focus heavily on metadata and archiving, making sure that the end users, be they linguists or native Komi, will have easy and intuitive access to our data.

The project is led by Rogier Blokland (Uppsala University, Sweden), Michael Rießler (Albert Ludwigs University of Freiburg, Germany) and Marina Fedina (Komi Republican Academy of State Service and Administration, Russian Federation). Niko Partanen works in the project as a PhD student and Vasiley Chuprov works as a research assistant.

We encourage students and researchers to contact us in order to get access to the developing version of the corpus.

To this end we have developed several tools that facilitate our own data processing, but which are maybe also useful for others. We also have written manuals for existing tools. All source code for this page and presented projects can be downloaded from [GitHub](https://github.com/).

The site uses a multilingual Jekyll template created by [Sylvain Durand](https://github.com/sylvaindurand/sylvaindurand.github.io).[[Everything that works on this site is because of him, and everything that's broken is my fault.]]

## License
Content, design and codes presented on this website are published under the [Creative Commons Attribution](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license. This means you can freely reuse them as long as the source is indicated.