---
title: "R-26"
---
In the spring we bought R-26 in our research project. We used it during our fieldwork in northern Komi Republic, but there was an accident very early in which the recorder got broken. This was a real misfortune, as our recording setup could had been very R-26 centred. Naturally we had enough R-09 recorders as backup for situations like this, and got all our sessions recorded well. However, it belated seriously proper testing of R-26. We take knowing our tools seriously, and this post is sort of a summary to what we have found out about it. 

## R-26

This recorder was released some years ago in the same time with R-05. It seems that Roland's releasing plan was to have out the same time cheaper and a bit less complex R-05 and more expensive and fancy R-26. R-05 has, as far as I see, almost all functions of R-09, but R-26 has lots of stuff we haven't seen earlier. I try to evaluate a bit what these functions are and what they give to us as field linguists.

## Multiple file recording

Still in the majority of recording devices plugging in a new microphone makes the whole device record from this new audio source only. This is usually what we want to do. As an example we may want to plug in a microphone into R-09 and have the recorder somewhere aside for monitoring the levels and battery life. However, in R-26 there is the possibility to use internal microphones same time as recording from external microphones. This creates a wav file for each mic. Not all constellations are permitted, but still it is possible to have three different audio files at one go. This has several consequences and benefits.

### More interesting recording set-up

As an example, with R-26 it is possible to record with two lapel mice in XLR slots and still have overall audio from internal microphones. Set-up is pictured below.

### All files are synchronised

Naturally it would also be possible to have two R-09 recorders to record lapel microphones -- this is what we did in our last fieldwork when R-26 broke. It worked still enough to capture sound from internal front microphones. The picture of set-up is below. In effect it did everything that R-26 alone would had done, but with the difference that the files are not synchronised. 

### Synchronised files -- something for ELAN 3.7.2

One of the updates in the last ELAN version 3.7.2 is that the audio source can be changed. This is really great, as the main reason to use several microphones is to have different audio sources. As an example, in the set-ups presented earlier there is access to sound of different speakers from the lapel-mics, and this is something we really need during transcribing while participants are speaking on top of each others. Before this change in ELAN it was not very convenient to change the audio source while transcribing, as changing the linked files is quite many clicks away. Instead, one would try to synchronise the audio and video in a way that is generally speaking balanced and pleasant to listen. Something along the lines in picture under. This would be exported into one audio file and one video file, which would then be the backbone of whole ELAN session. Now each track could in principle be exported separately. There are some situations where it is maybe not feasible, but at least when there are complete audio tracks for the whole session this should be thought about.

## Using R-26 as Audio Interface

I must admit that when I started to look into features of R-26 I didn't even know what an audio interface is. I think I've by now figured it out. It is a box between the microphones and your computer. I have had some microphones with 3.5 mm jacks, and occasionally I've thought could I just plug this into my laptop. It seems that in theory I could, but this would not be the best way to go. As far as I understand, my Macbook just doesn't have the hardware to actually process this signal in an adequate way. For that we need more specific tools, which is called audio interface, and interestingly R-26 is also a piece of hardware that can function as one. It says in R-26 manual that:

> The R-26 functions as a USB audio interface for your PC (Windows or
Mac), allowing you to send the sound you’ve captured on its built-in stereo
mics or external mics/devices directly to your favorite DAW program.

DAW means the audio recording programs at your computer. I must mention in this point that of course the main reason why we are using tools like **portable audio recorders** is their portability. Certainly these small recording devices have in many ways revolutionised the field linguistics. We have endless storage capacity on SD cards, all our tools fit into a small bag that is easily carried around. But things are expanding from another end. We can have multiple recorders, videocamera, couple of stands for all of these, back-up things, some extra microphones and cables -- actually we end up carrying quite lots of stuff with us already. I always have to drag my laptop with me too, as I have to be able to access my database while I work with informants. With FileMaker Go I can probably start doing this with my iPad, but still, I need my laptop sometime in the end of the day anyway in order to type down all new metadata.

It could make sense to look a bit what are the **non-portable audio recorders**, and whether they have some features which we don't have yet in recorders we normally use. We work often in remote locations -- but that is not always the case. Instead, the village houses in which I've been doing most of my fieldwork normally have reliable electricity at least. This way we wouldn't always need to work with portable self-powering equipment. Testing R-26 as an audio interface gives a good possibility to find out where this line of thinking can take us. More can be read **here**.
