---
title: "Archives and version control"
---

In our research project we have been using both GitHub and SVN to take care from the version control. We have several people working with the same files, and without these procedures we would end up into a catastrophe. In many ways the version control is among the most important things to make sure no information or work is lost.

We are currently building a corpus of spoken Komi language. We have collected our own materials, but often we will be able to include into our corpus data collected and annotated by others. So the persons who have done the transcriptions range from students to the professors. There are both native speakers as second language speakers, maybe even some western linguists with mainly theoretical knowledge of the language.

In this context errors are inevitable. Although our project lasts only three years, I see it as researchers responsibility to keep making corrections whenever they are spotted. We cannot pretend that the work is really "ready" and "finished" when the project is over. In a way the archive must be understood as a quite dynamic place where the most up-to-date versions are being stored. It could be a good option to maintain archive regularly with all updates, as an example, doing it once each month. However, these updates will keep taking place with the corpora people really work with.

The archive naturally has it's own version control system. However, this is invisible for the actual user. I see here a real issue, because the changes in archive eventually add up and start to be visible in changing research results. This means, as an example, that to reproduce research paper published in 01.10.2014 one would always need access to that version of the corpus. The version of 01.11.2014 may already give different results for the same searches.

I would really love to see this as a real feature of language archive technology. It sort of is there within TLA archive as well, but all the logs are not collected into one place. As an example, there could be an automatic log that keeps track from the changes in archive. There could also be a possibility to request annotation files from the specific date. Only this way we could make sure that our research is really reproduceable.